Chapter 1

What is Physics?

Physics is the study of the world around us. In a sense we are more qualified to do physics

than any other science. From the day we are born we study the things around us in an effort to

understand how they work and relate to each other. Learning how to catch or throw a ball is a

physics undertaking for example.

In the field of study we refer to as physics we just try to make the things everyone has been

studying more clear. We attempt to describe them through simple rules and mathematics.

Mathematics is merely the language we use.

The best approach to physics is to relate everything you learn to things you have already noticed

in your everyday life. Sometimes when you look at things closely you discover things you had

overlooked intially.

It is the continued scrutiny of everything we know about the world around us that leads people

to the lifelong study of physics. You can start with asking a simple question like "Why is the sky

blue?" which could lead you to electromagnetic waves which in turn could lead you wave particle

duality and to energy levels of atoms and before long you are studying quantum mechanics or

the structure of the universe.

In the sections that follow notice that we will try to describe how we will communicate the things

we are dealing with. This is our langauge. Once this is done we can begin the adventure of

looking more closely at the world we live in.

/ntsDescriptions relating to these questions must be included: What is meant by a theory?

How does a hypothesis become part of a law?

(a) Define the term "laboratory." (b) How does your school's physics laboratory fit this definition?

Distinguish between science and technology.

3

CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS PHYSICS?

4
CHAPTER 1. WHAT IS PHYSICS?
4
Part II
Grade 10 - Physics
5

here we go ... again and again....
7
8
8

Chapter 2

Units

2.1 Introduction

Imagine you had to make curtains and needed to buy fabric. The shop assistant would need

to know how much fabric you needed. Telling her you need fabric 2 wide and 6 long would be

insufficient - you have to specify the unit (i.e. 2 metres wide and 6 metres long). Without

the unit the information is incomplete and the shop assistant would have to guess. If you were

making curtains for a doll's house the dimensions might be 2 centimetres wide and 6 centimetres

long!

It is not just lengths that have units, all physical quantities have units (e.g. time, temperature,

distance, etc.).

Definition: Physical Quantity

A physical quantity is anything that you can measure. For example, length, temperature,

distance and time are physical quantities.

2.2 Unit Systems

2.2.1 SI Units

We will be using the SI units in this course. SI units are the internationally agreed upon units.

Historically these units are based on the metric system which was developed in France at the

time of the French Revolution.

Definition: SI Units

The name SI units comes from the French Syste`me International d'Unite´s, which means

international system of units.

There are seven base SI units. These are listed in Table 2.1. All physical quantities have units

which can be built from these seven base units. These seven units were defined to be the base

units. So, it is possible to create a different set of units by defining a different set of base units.

These seven units are called base units because none of them can be expressed as combinations

of the other six. This is identical to bricks and concrete being the base units of a building. You

can build different things using different combinations of bricks and concrete. The 26 letters of

the alphabet are the base units for a language like English. Many different words can be formed

by using these letters.

9
