8.3 Permanent magnets

8.3.1 The poles of permanent magnets

Because the domains in a permanent magnet all line up in a particular direction, the magnet

has a pair of opposite poles, called north (usually shortened to N) and south (usually shortened

to S). Even if the magnet is cut into tiny pieces, each piece will still have both a N and a S

pole. These poles always occur in pairs. In nature we never find a north magnetic pole or south

magnetic pole on its own.

S N

... after breaking in half ...

S S N S N

Magnetic fields are different to gravitational and electric fields. In nature, positive and negative

electric charges can be found on their own, but you never find just a north magnetic pole or

south magnetic pole on its own. On the very small scale, zooming in to the size of atoms,

magnetic fields are caused by moving charges (i.e. the negatively charged electrons).

8.3.2 Magnetic attraction and repulsion

Like poles of magnets repel one another whilst unlike poles attract. This means that two N poles

or two S poles will push away from each other while a N pole and a S pole will be drawn towards

each other.

Definition: Attraction and Repulsion

Like poles of magnets repel each other whilst unlike poles attract each other.

169

8.3 CHAPTER 8. MAGNETISM - GRADE 10

Worked Example 39: Attraction and Repulsion

Question: Do you think the following magnets will repel or be attracted to each

other?

S magnet N N magnet S

Answer

Step 1 : Determine what is required

We are required to determine whether the two magnets will repel each other or be

attracted to each other.

Step 2 : Determine what is given

We are given two magnets with the N pole of one approaching the N pole of the

other.

Step 3 : Determine the conclusion

Since both poles are the same, the magnets will repel each other.

Worked Example 40: Attraction and repulsion

Question: Do you think the following magnets will repel or be attracted to each

other?

N magnet S N magnet S

Answer

Step 1 : Determine what is required

We are required to determine whether the two magnets will repel each other or be

attracted to each other.

Step 2 : Determine what is given

We are given two magnets with the N pole of one approaching the S pole of the

other.

Step 3 : Determine the conclusion

Since both poles are the different, the magnets will be attracted to each other.

8.3.3 Representing magnetic fields

Magnetic fields can be represented using magnetic field lines. Although the magnetic field of

a permanent magnet is everywhere surrounding the magnet (in all 3 dimensions), we draw only

some of the field lines to represent the field (usually only 2 dimensions are shown in drawings).

170
