2.7 The Importance of Units

Without units much of our work as scientists would be meaningless. We need to express our

thoughts clearly and units give meaning to the numbers we measure and calculate. Depending

on which units we use, the numbers are different. For example if you have 12 water, it means

nothing. You could have 12 ml of water, 12 litres of water, or even 12 bottles of water. Units

are an essential part of the language we use. Units must be specified when expressing physical

quantities. Imagine that you are baking a cake, but the units, like grams and millilitres, for the

flour, milk, sugar and baking powder are not specified!

Activity :: Investigation : Importance of Units

Work in groups of 5 to discuss other possible situations where using the incorrect

set of units can be to your disadvantage or even dangerous. Look for examples at

home, at school, at a hospital, when travelling and in a shop.

Activity :: Case Study : The importance of units

Read the following extract from CNN News 30 September 1999 and answer the

questions below.

NASA: Human error caused loss of Mars orbiter November 10, 1999

Failure to convert English measures to metric values caused the loss of the Mars

Climate Orbiter, a spacecraft that smashed into the planet instead of reaching a safe

orbit, a NASA investigation concluded Wednesday.

The Mars Climate Orbiter, a key craft in the space agency's exploration of the

red planet, vanished on 23 September after a 10 month journey. It is believed that

the craft came dangerously close to the atmosphere of Mars, where it presumably

burned and broke into pieces.

An investigation board concluded that NASA engineers failed to convert English

measures of rocket thrusts to newton, a metric system measuring rocket force. One

English pound of force equals 4,45 newtons. A small difference between the two

values caused the spacecraft to approach Mars at too low an altitude and the craft

is thought to have smashed into the planet's atmosphere and was destroyed.

The spacecraft was to be a key part of the exploration of the planet. From its

station about the red planet, the Mars Climate Orbiter was to relay signals from the

Mars Polar Lander, which is scheduled to touch down on Mars next month.

"The root cause of the loss of the spacecraft was a failed translation of English

units into metric units and a segment of ground-based, navigation-related mission

software," said Arthus Stephenson, chairman of the investigation board.

Questions:

1. Why did the Mars Climate Orbiter crash? Answer in your own words.

2. How could this have been avoided?

3. Why was the Mars Orbiter sent to Mars?

4. Do you think space exploration is important? Explain your answer.

