10.2 Potential Difference

10.2.1 Potential Difference

When a circuit is connected and is a complete circuit charge can move through the circuit.

Charge will not move unless there is a reason, a force. Think of it as though charge is at rest

and something has to push it along. This means that work needs to be done to make charge

move. A force acts on the charges, doing work, to make them move. The force is provided by

the battery in the circuit.

We call the moving charge "current" and we will talk about this later.

The position of the charge in the circuit tells you how much potential energy it has because of

the force being exerted on it. This is like the force from gravity, the higher an object is above

the ground (position) the more potential energy it has.

The amount of work to move a charge from one point to another point is how much the potential

energy has changed. This is the difference in potential energy, called potential difference. Notice

that it is a difference between the value of potential energy at two points so we say that potential

difference is measured between or across two points. We do not say potential difference through

something.

192

CHAPTER 10. ELECTRIC CIRCUITS - GRADE 10 10.2

Definition: Potential Difference

Electrical potential difference as the difference in electrical potential energy per unit charge

between two points. The units of potential difference are the volt (V).

The units are volt (V), which is the same as joule per coulomb, the amount of work done per

unit charge. Electrical potential difference is also called voltage.

10.2.2 Potential Difference and Parallel Resistors

When resistors are connected in parallel the start and end points for all the resistors are the same.

These points have the same potential energy and so the potential difference between them is the

same no matter what is put in between them. You can have one, two or many resistors between

the two points, the potential difference will not change. You can ignore whatever components

are between two points in a circuit when calculating the difference between the two points.

Look at the following circuit diagrams. The battery is the same in all cases, all that changes is

more resistors are added between the points marked by the black dots. If we were to measure

the potential difference between the two dots in these circuits we would get the same answer for

all three cases.

b b b

b b b

Lets look at two resistors in parallel more closely. When you construct a circuit you use wires and

you might think that measuring the voltage in different places on the wires will make a difference.

This is not true. The potential difference or voltage measurement will only be different if you

measure a different set of components. All points on the wires that have no circuit components

between them will give you the same measurements.

All three of the measurements shown in the picture below will give you the same voltages. The

different measurement points on the left have no components between them so there is no change

in potential energy. Exactly the same applies to the different points on the right. When you

measure the potential difference between the points on the left and right you will get the same

answer.

V = 5 V

V

b

b

A B zoom

ing in

: A B

b b

E C D F

b

b

E F

C D

V

V = 5 V

V

V = 5 V

193
