10.4 Resistance

10.4.1 What causes resistance?

We have spoken about resistors that slow down the flow of charge in a conductor. On a

microscopic level, electrons moving through the conductor collide with the particles of which

the conductor (metal) is made. When they collide, they transfer kinetic energy. The electrons

therefore lose kinetic energy and slow down. This leads to resistance. The transferred energy

causes the conductor to heat up. You can feel this directly if you touch a cellphone charger when

you are charging a cell phone - the charger gets warm!

Definition: Resistance

Resistance slows down the flow of charge in a circuit. We use the symbol R to show

resistance and it is measured in units called Ohms with the symbol Ω.

Volt

1 Ohm = 1 .

Ampere

All conductors have some resistance. For example, a piece of wire has less resistance than a light

bulb, but both have resistance. The high resistance of the filament (small wire) in a lightbulb

causes the electrons to transfer a lot of their kinetic energy in the form of heat. The heat energy

is enough to cause the filament to glow white-hot which produces light. The wires connecting

the lamp to the cell or battery hardly even get warm while conducting the same amount of

current. This is because of their much lower resistance due to their larger cross-section (they

are thicker).

An important effect of a resistor is that it converts electrical energy into other forms of energy,

such as heat and light.

Itneterreessttinigng There is a special type of conductor, called a superconductor that has no

FFacctt resistance, but the materials that make up superconductors only start supercon-

ducting at very low temperatures (approximately -170◦C).

Why do batteries go flat?

A battery stores chemical potential energy. When it is connected in a circuit, a chemical reaction

takes place inside the battery which converts chemical potential energy to electrical energy

which powers the electrons to move through the circuit. All the circuit elements (such as the

conducting leads, resistors and lightbulbs) have some resistance to the flow of charge and convert

the electrical energy to heat and/or light. The battery goes flat when all its chemical potential

energy has been converted into other forms of energy.

10.4.2 Resistors in electric circuits

It is important to understand what effect adding resistors to a circuit has on the total resistance

of a circuit and on the current that can flow in the circuit.

202

CHAPTER 10. ELECTRIC CIRCUITS - GRADE 10 10.4

Resistors in series

When we add resistors in series to a circuit, we increase the resistance to the flow of current.

There is only one path that the current can flow down and the current is the same at all places

in the series circuit. Take a look at the diagram below: On the left there is a circuit with a single

resistor and a battery. No matter where we measure the current, it is the same in a series circuit.

On the right, we have added a second resistor in series to the circuit. The total resistance of

the circuit has increased and you can see from the reading on the ammeter that the current in

the circuit has decreased.

R = 2 Ω R = 2 Ω

A I = 1 A A I = 0.67 A

(the current is

A I = 1 A smaller) A I = 0.67 A

(the current is

V = 2 V V = 2 V smaller)

R = 1 Ω

The current in a series circuit Adding a resistor to the circuit

is the same everywhere increases the total resistance

Resistors in parallel

In contrast to the series case, when we add resistors in parallel, we create more paths along

which current can flow. By doing this we decrease the total resistance of the circuit!

Take a look at the diagram below. On the left we have the same circuit as in the previous

diagram with a battery and a resistor. The ammeter shows a current of 1 ampere. On the right

we have added a second resistor in parallel to the first resistor. This has increased the number

of paths (branches) the charge can take through the circuit - the total resistance has decreased.

You can see that the current in the circuit has increased. Also notice that the current in the

different branches can be different.

I = 2 A

A

R = 2 Ω R = 1 Ω

A

R = 2 Ω I = 1 A

A I = 1 A A I = 3 A

The current

V = 2 V V = 2 V is bigger

Adding a resistor to the circuit in

parallel decreases the total resistance

Exercise: Resistance

1. What is the unit of resistance called and what is its symbol?

2. Explain what happens to the total resistance of a circuit when resistors are

added in series?

203
