10.4.1 What causes resistance?

We have spoken about resistors that slow down the flow of charge in a conductor. On a

microscopic level, electrons moving through the conductor collide with the particles of which

the conductor (metal) is made. When they collide, they transfer kinetic energy. The electrons

therefore lose kinetic energy and slow down. This leads to resistance. The transferred energy

causes the conductor to heat up. You can feel this directly if you touch a cellphone charger when

you are charging a cell phone - the charger gets warm!

Definition: Resistance

Resistance slows down the flow of charge in a circuit. We use the symbol R to show

resistance and it is measured in units called Ohms with the symbol Ω.

Volt

1 Ohm = 1 .

Ampere

All conductors have some resistance. For example, a piece of wire has less resistance than a light

bulb, but both have resistance. The high resistance of the filament (small wire) in a lightbulb

causes the electrons to transfer a lot of their kinetic energy in the form of heat. The heat energy

is enough to cause the filament to glow white-hot which produces light. The wires connecting

the lamp to the cell or battery hardly even get warm while conducting the same amount of

current. This is because of their much lower resistance due to their larger cross-section (they

are thicker).

An important effect of a resistor is that it converts electrical energy into other forms of energy,

such as heat and light.

Itneterreessttinigng There is a special type of conductor, called a superconductor that has no

FFacctt resistance, but the materials that make up superconductors only start supercon-

ducting at very low temperatures (approximately -170◦C).

Why do batteries go flat?

A battery stores chemical potential energy. When it is connected in a circuit, a chemical reaction

takes place inside the battery which converts chemical potential energy to electrical energy

which powers the electrons to move through the circuit. All the circuit elements (such as the

conducting leads, resistors and lightbulbs) have some resistance to the flow of charge and convert

the electrical energy to heat and/or light. The battery goes flat when all its chemical potential

energy has been converted into other forms of energy.

