11.3 Notation

Vectors are different to scalars and therefore has its own notation.

211

11.4 CHAPTER 11. VECTORS

Chapter 11

Vectors

11.1 Introduction

This chapter focuses on vectors. We will learn what is a vector, how it differs from everyday

numbers, how to add, subtract and multiply them and where they appear in Physics.

Are vectors Physics? No, vectors themselves are not Physics. Physics is just a description of

the world around us. To describe something we need to use a language. The most common

language used to describe Physics is Mathematics. Vectors form a very important part of the

mathematical description of Physics, so much so that it is absolutely essential to master the use

of vectors.

11.2 Scalars and Vectors

In Mathematics, you learned that a number is something that represents a quantity. For example

if you have 5 books, 6 apples and 1 bicycle, the 5, 6, and 1 represent how many of each item

you have.

These kinds of numbers are known as scalars.

Definition: Scalar

A scalar is a quantity that has only magnitude (size).

An extension to a scalar is a vector, which is a scalar with a direction. For example, if you travel

1 km down Main Road to school, the quantity 1 km down Main Road is a vector. The 1 km

is the quantity (or scalar) and the down Main Road gives a direction.

In Physics we use the word magnitude to refer to the scalar part of the vector.

Definition: Vectors

A vector is a quantity that has both magnitude and direction.

A vector should tell you how much and which way.

For example, a man is driving his car east along a freeway at 100 km·hr−1. What we have given

here is a vector - the velocity. The car is moving at 100 km·hr−1(this is the magnitude) and we

know where it is going - east (this is the direction). Thus, we know the speed and direction of

the car. These two quantities, a magnitude and a direction, form a vector we call velocity.

11.3 Notation

Vectors are different to scalars and therefore has its own notation.

211

11.4 CHAPTER 11. VECTORS

