12.2 Force

12.2.1 What is a force?

A force is anything that can cause a change to objects. Forces can:

• change the shape of an object

• move or stop an object

• change the direction of a moving object.

A force can be classified as either a contact force or a non-contact force.

A contact force must touch or be in contact with an object to cause a change. Examples of

contact forces are:

• the force that is used to push or pull things, like on a door to open or close it

• the force that a sculptor uses to turn clay into a pot

• the force of the wind to turn a windmill

A non-contact force does not have to touch an object to cause a change. Examples of non-

contact forces are:

• the force due to gravity, like the Earth pulling the Moon towards itself

• the force due to electricity, like a proton and an electron attracting each other

• the force due to magnetism, like a magnet pulling a paper clip towards itself

The unit of force is the newton (symbol N). This unit is named after Sir Isaac Newton who

first defined force. Force is a vector quantity and has a magnitude and a direction. We use the

abbreviation F for force.

239

12.2 CHAPTER 12. FORCE, MOMENTUM AND IMPULSE - GRADE 11

Itneterreessttinigng There is a popular story that while Sir Isaac Newton was sitting under an apple

FFacctt tree, an apple fell on his head, and he suddenly thought of the Universal Law of

Gravitation. Coincidently, the weight of a small apple is approximately 1 N.

Itneterreessttinigng Force was first described by Archimedes of Syracuse (circa 287 BC - 212 BC).

FFacctt Archimedes was a Greek mathematician, astronomer, philosopher, physicist and

engineer. He was killed by a Roman soldier during the sack of the city, despite

orders from the Roman general, Marcellus, that he was not to be harmed.

This chapter will often refer to the resultant force acting on an object. The resultant force is

simply the vector sum of all the forces acting on the object. It is very important to remember

that all the forces must be acting on the same object. The resultant force is the force that has

the same effect as all the other forces added together.

12.2.2 Examples of Forces in Physics

Most of Physics revolves around forces. Although there are many different forces, all are handled

in the same way. All forces in Physics can be put into one of four groups. These are gravitational

forces, electromagnetic forces, strong nuclear force and weak nuclear force. You will mostly come

across gravitational or electromagnetic forces at school.

Gravitational Forces

Gravity is the attractive force between two objects due to the mass of the objects. When you

throw a ball in the air, its mass and the Earth's mass attract each other, which leads to a force

between them. The ball falls back towards the Earth, and the Earth accelerates towards the ball.

The movement of the Earth towards the ball is, however, so small that you couldn't possibly

measure it.

Electromagnetic Forces

Almost all of the forces that we experience in everyday life are electromagnetic in origin. They

have this unusual name because long ago people thought that electric forces and magnetic forces

were different things. After much work and experimentation, it has been realised that they are

actually different manifestations of the same underlying theory.

Electric or Electrostatic Forces

If we have objects carrying electrical charge, which are not moving, then we are dealing with

electrostatic forces (Coulomb's Law). This force is actually much stronger than gravity. This may

seem strange, since gravity is obviously very powerful, and holding a balloon to the wall seems to

be the most impressive thing electrostatic forces have done, but if we think about it: for gravity

to be detectable, we need to have a very large mass nearby. But a balloon rubbed in someone's

hair can stick to a wall with a force so strong that it overcomes the force of gravity-with just

the charges in the balloon and the wall!

240
