CHAPTER 12. FORCE, MOMENTUM AND IMPULSE - GRADE 11 12.5

which the momentum is changed is increased. This decreases the force and causes the truck to

slow down.

Follow-Through in Sports

In sports where rackets and bats are used, like tennis, cricket, squash, badminton and baseball,

the hitter is often encouraged to follow-through when striking the ball. High speed films of the

collisions between bats/rackets and balls have shown that following through increases the time

over which the collision between the racket/bat and ball occurs. This increase in the time of

the collision causes an increase in the velocity change of the ball. This means that a hitter can

cause the ball to leave the racket/bat faster by following through. In these sports, returning the

ball with a higher velocity often increases the chances of success.

Crumple Zones in Cars

Another safety application of trying to reduce the force experienced is in crumple zones in cars.

When two cars have a collision, two things can happen:

1. the cars bounce off each other, or

2. the cars crumple together.

Which situation is more dangerous for the occupants of the cars? When cars bounce off each

other, or rebound, there is a larger change in momentum and therefore a larger impulse. A

larger impulse means that a greater force is experienced by the occupants of the cars. When

cars crumple together, there is a smaller change in momentum and therefore a smaller impulse.

The smaller impulse means that the occupants of the cars experience a smaller force. Car

manufacturers use this idea and design crumple zones into cars, such that the car has a greater

chance of crumpling than rebounding in a collision. Also, when the car crumples, the change in

the car's momentum happens over a longer time. Both these effects result in a smaller force on

the occupants of the car, thereby increasing their chances of survival.

Activity :: Egg Throw : This activity demonstrates the effect of impulse

and how it is used to improve safety. Have two learners hold up a bed sheet

or large piece of fabric. Then toss an egg at the sheet. The egg should not

break, because the collision between the egg and the bed sheet lasts over an

extended period of time since the bed sheet has some give in it. By increasing

the time of the collision, the force of the impact is minimized. Take care to

aim at the sheet, because if you miss the sheet, you will definitely break the

egg and have to clean up the mess!

12.5.10 Exercise

1. A canon, mass 500 kg, fires a shell, mass 1 kg, horizontally to the right at 500 m·s−1.

What is the magnitude and direction of the initial recoil velocity of the canon?

2. The velocity of a moving trolley of mass 1 kg is 3 m·s−1. A block of wood, mass 0,5 kg,

is dropped vertically on to the trolley. Immediately after the collision, the speed of the

trolley and block is 2 m·s−1. By way of calculation, show whether momentum is conserved

in the collision.

3. A 7200 kg empty railway truck is stationary. A fertilizer firm loads 10800 kg fertilizer into

the truck. A second, identical, empty truck is moving at 10 m·s−1when it collides with

the loaded truck.

301

12.6 CHAPTER 12. FORCE, MOMENTUM AND IMPULSE - GRADE 11

3.1 If the empty truck stops completely immediately after the collision, use a conservation

law to calculate the velocity of the loaded truck immediately after the collision.

3.2 Calculate the distance that the loaded truck moves after collision, if a constant

frictional force of 24 kN acts on the truck.

4. A child drops a squash ball of mass 0,05 kg. The ball strikes the ground with a velocity

of 4 m·s−1and rebounds with a velocity of 3 m·s−1. Does the law of conservation of

momentum apply to this situation? Explain.

5. A bullet of mass 50 g travelling horizontally at 600 m·s−1strikes a stationary wooden block

of mass 2 kg resting on a smooth horizontal surface. The bullet gets stuck in the block.

5.1 Name and state the principle which can be applied to find the speed of the block-

and-bullet system after the bullet entered the block.

5.2 Calculate the speed of the bullet-and-block system immediately after impact.

5.3 If the time of impact was 5 x 10−4 seconds, calculate the force that the bullet exerts

on the block during impact.

