12.6 Torque and Levers

12.6.1 Torque

This chapter has dealt with forces and how they lead to motion in a straight line. In this section,

we examine how forces lead to rotational motion.

When an object is fixed or supported at one point and a force acts on it a distance away from

the support, it tends to make the object turn. The moment of force or torque (symbol, τ read

tau) is defined as the product of the distance from the support or pivot (r) and the component

of force perpendicular to the object, F⊥.

τ = F⊥ · r (12.9)

Torque can be seen as a rotational force. The unit of torque is N·m and torque is a vector

quantity. Some examples of where torque arises are shown in Figures 12.17, 12.18 and 12.19.

F

r

τ

Figure 12.17: The force exerted on one side of a see-saw causes it to swing.

F

r

τ

Figure 12.18: The force exerted on the edge of a propellor causes the propellor to spin.

For example in Figure 12.19, if a force F of 10 N is applied perpendicularly to the spanner at a

distance r of 0,3 m from the center of the bolt, then the torque applied to the bolt is:

τ = F⊥ · r

= (10 N)(0,3m)

= 3N ·m

302

CHAPTER 12. FORCE, MOMENTUM AND IMPULSE - GRADE 11 12.6

F

r

τ

Figure 12.19: The force exerted on a spanner helps to loosen the bolt.

If the force of 10 N is now applied at a distance of 0,15 m from the centre of the bolt, then the

torque is:

τ = F⊥ · r

= (10 N)(0,15m)

= 1,5N ·m

This shows that there is less torque when the force is applied closer to the bolt than further

away.

Important: Loosening a bolt

If you are trying to loosen (or tighten) a bolt, apply the force on the spanner further away from

the bolt, as this results in a greater torque to the bolt making it easier to loosen.

Important: Any component of a force exerted parallel to an object will not cause the object

to turn. Only perpendicular components cause turning.

Important: Torques

The direction of a torque is either clockwise or anticlockwise. When torques are added, choose

one direction as positive and the opposite direction as negative. If equal clockwise and anti-

clockwise torques are applied to an object, they will cancel out and there will be no net turning

effect.

Worked Example 95: Merry-go-round

Question: Several children are playing in the park. One child pushes the merry-go-

round with a force of 50 N. The diameter of the merry-go-round is 3,0 m. What

torque does the child apply if the force is applied perpendicularly at point A?

F

diameter = 3 m

A

303
