17.5 Capacitance and the parallel plate capacitor

17.5.1 Capacitors and capacitance

A parallel plate capacitor is a device that consists of two oppositely charged conducting plates

separated by a small distance, which stores charge. When voltage is applied to the capacitor,

electric charge of equal magnitude, but opposite polarity, build up on each plate.

R

E

C

Figure 17.1: A capacitor (C) connected in series with a resistor (R) and an energy source (E).

Definition: Capacitance

Capacitance is the charge stored per volt and is measured in farad (F)

Mathematically, capacitance is the ratio of the charge on a single plate to the voltage across

the plates of the capacitor:

Q

C = .

V

403

17.5 CHAPTER 17. ELECTROSTATICS - GRADE 11

Capacitance is measured in farads (F). Since capacitance is defined as C = QV , the units are in

terms of charge over potential difference. The unit of charge is the coulomb and the unit of the

potential difference is the volt. One farad is therefore the capacitance if one coulomb of charge

was stored on a capacitor for every volt applied.

1 C of charge is a very large amount of charge. So, for a small amount of voltage applied, a

1 F capacitor can store a enormous amount of charge. Therefore, capacitors are often denoted

in terms of microfarads (1 × 10−6), nanofarads (1× 10−9), or picofarads (1× 10−12).

Important: Q is the magnitude of the charge stored on either plate, not on both plates

added together. Since one plate stores positive charge and the other stores negative charge,

the total charge on the two plates is zero.

Worked Example 118: Capacitance

Question: Suppose that a 5 V battery is connected in a circuit to a 5 pF

capacitor. After the battery has been connected for a long time, what is the charge

stored on each of the plates?

Answer

To begin remember that after a voltage has been applied for a long time the

capacitor is fully charged. The relation between voltage and the maximum charge

of a capacitor is found in equation ??.

CV = Q

Inserting the given values of C = 5F and V = 5V, we find that:

Q = CV

= (5× 10−12F )(5V )

= 2,5× 10−11C

17.5.2 Dielectrics

The electric field between the plates of a capacitor is affected by the substance between them.

The substance between the plates is called a dielectric. Common substances used as dielectrics

are mica, perspex, air, paper and glass.

When a dielectric is inserted between the plates of a parallel plate capacitor the dielectric

becomes polarised so an electric field is induced in the dielectric that opposes the field between

the plates. When the two electric fields are superposed, the new field between the plates

becomes smaller. Thus the voltage between the plates decreases so the capacitance increases.

In every capacitor, the dielectric keeps the charge on one plate from travelling to the other

plate. However, each capacitor is different in how much charge it allows to build up on the

electrodes per voltage applied. When scientists started studying capacitors they discovered the

property that the voltage applied to the capacitor was proportional to the maximum charge

that would accumulate on the electrodes. The constant that made this relation into an

equation was called the capacitance, C. The capacitance was different for different capacitors.

But, it stayed constant no matter how much voltage was applied. So, it predicts how much

charge will be stored on a capacitor when different voltages are applied.

17.5.3 Physical properties of the capacitor and capacitance

The capacitance of a capacitor is proportional to the surface area of the conducting plate and

inversely proportional to the distance between the plates. It is also proportional to the

404
