17.6 Capacitor as a circuit device

17.6.1 A capacitor in a circuit

When a capacitor is connected in a DC circuit, current will flow until the capacitor is fully

charged. After that, no further current will flow. If the charged capacitor is connected to

another circuit with no source of emf in it, the capacitor will discharge through the circuit,

creating a potential difference for a short time. This is useful, for example, in a camera flash.

Initially, the electrodes have no net charge. A voltage source is applied to charge a capacitor.

The voltage source creates an electric field, causing the electrons to move. The charges move

around the circuit stopping at the left electrode. Here they are unable to travel across the

dielectric, since electrons cannot travel through an insulator. The charge begins to accumulate,

and an electric field forms pointing from the left electrode to the right electrode. This is the

opposite direction of the electric field created by the voltage source. When this electric field is

equal to the electric field created by the voltage source, the electrons stop moving. The

capacitor is then fully charged, with a positive charge on the left electrode and a negative

charge on the right electrode.

If the voltage is removed, the capacitor will discharge. The electrons begin to move because in

the absence of the voltage source, there is now a net electric field. This field is due to the

imbalance of charge on the electrodes-the field across the dielectric. Just as the electrons

flowed to the positive electrode when the capacitor was being charged, during discharge, the

electrons flow to negative electrode. The charges cancel, and there is no longer an electric field

across the dielectric.

406

CHAPTER 17. ELECTROSTATICS - GRADE 11 17.7

17.6.2 Real-world applications: capacitors

Capacitors are used in many different types of circuitry. In car speakers, capacitors are often

used to aid the power supply when the speaker require more power than the car battery can

provide. Capacitors are also used to in processing electronic signals in circuits, such as

smoothing voltage spikes due to inconsistent voltage sources. This is important for protecting

sensitive electronic compoments in a circuit.

17.7 Summary

1. Objects can be positively, negatively charged or neutral.

2. Charged objects feel a force with a magnitude:

Q1Q2

F = k

r2

3. The force is attractive for unlike charges and repulsive for like charges.

4. A test charge is +1C

5. Electric fields start on positive charges and end on negative charges

6. The electric field is constant between equally charged parallel plates

7. A charge in an electric field, just like a mass under gravity, has potential energy which is

related to the work to move it.

8. A capacitor is a device that stores charge in a circuit.

17.8 Exercises - Electrostatics

1. Two charges of +3nC and −5nC are separated by a distance of 40cm. What is the

electrostatic force between the two charges?

2. Two insulated metal spheres carrying charges of +6nC and −10nC are separated by a

distance of 20 mm.

A What is the electrostatic force between the spheres?

B The two spheres are touched and then separated by a distance of 60mm. What are

the new charges on the spheres?

C What is new electrostatic force between the spheres at this distance?

3. The electrostatic force between two charged spheres of +3nC and +4nC respectively is

0,04N. What is the distance between the spheres?

4. Calculate the potential difference between two parallel plates if it takes 5000J of energy

to move 25C of charge between the plates?

5. Draw the electric field pattern lines between:

A two equal positive point charges.

B two equal negative point charges.

6. Calculate the electric field between the plates of a capacitor if the plates are 20mm apart

and the potential difference between the plates is 300V.

7. Calculate the electrical potential energy of a 6nC charge that is 20cm from a 10nC

charge.

8. What is the capacitance of a capacitor if it has a charge of 0,02C on each of its plates

when the potential difference between the plates is 12V?

407
