2.2 Unit Systems

2.2.1 SI Units

We will be using the SI units in this course. SI units are the internationally agreed upon units.

Historically these units are based on the metric system which was developed in France at the

time of the French Revolution.

Definition: SI Units

The name SI units comes from the French Syste`me International d'Unite´s, which means

international system of units.

There are seven base SI units. These are listed in Table 2.1. All physical quantities have units

which can be built from these seven base units. These seven units were defined to be the base

units. So, it is possible to create a different set of units by defining a different set of base units.

These seven units are called base units because none of them can be expressed as combinations

of the other six. This is identical to bricks and concrete being the base units of a building. You

can build different things using different combinations of bricks and concrete. The 26 letters of

the alphabet are the base units for a language like English. Many different words can be formed

by using these letters.

9

2.3 CHAPTER 2. UNITS

Base quantity Name Symbol

length metre m

mass kilogram kg

time second s

electric current ampere A

temperature kelvin K

amount of substance mole mol

luminous intensity candela cd

Table 2.1: SI Base Units

2.2.2 The Other Systems of Units

The SI Units are not the only units available, but they are most widely used. In Science there

are three other sets of units that can also be used. These are mentioned here for interest only.

c.g.s Units

In the c.g.s. system, the metre is replaced by the centimetre and the kilogram is replaced by the

gram. This is a simple change but it means that all units derived from these two are changed.

For example, the units of force and work are different. These units are used most often in

astrophysics and atomic physics.

Imperial Units

Imperial units arose when kings and queens decided the measures that were to be used in the

land. All the imperial base units, except for the measure of time, are different to those of SI

units. This is the unit system you are most likely to encounter if SI units are not used. Examples

of imperial units are pounds, miles, gallons and yards. These units are used by the Americans

and British. As you can imagine, having different units in use from place to place makes scientific

communication very difficult. This was the motivation for adopting a set of internationally agreed

upon units.

Natural Units

This is the most sophisticated choice of units. Here the most fundamental discovered quantities

(such as the speed of light) are set equal to 1. The argument for this choice is that all other

quantities should be built from these fundamental units. This system of units is used in high

energy physics and quantum mechanics.

2.3 Writing Units as Words or Symbols

Unit names are always written with a lowercase first letter, for example, we write metre and litre.

The symbols or abbreviations of units are also written with lowercase initials, for example m for

metre and ℓ for litre. The exception to this rule is if the unit is named after a person, then the

symbol is a capital letter. For example, the kelvin was named after Lord Kelvin and its symbol is

K. If the abbreviation of the unit that is named after a person has two letters, the second letter

is lowercase, for example Hz for hertz.

Exercise: Naming of Units

For the following symbols of units that you will come across later in this book,

write whether you think the unit is named after a person or not.

10
