22.4 Failure and strength of materials

22.4.1 The properties of matter

The strength of a material is defined as the stress (the force per unit cross-sectional area) that

it can withstand. Strength is measured in newtons per square metre (N ·m−2).

Stiffness is a measure of how flexible a material is. In Science we measure the stiffness of a

material by calculating its Young's Modulus. The Young's modulus is a ratio of how much it

bends to the load applied to it. Stiffness is measure in newtons per metre (N ·m−1).

Hardness of a material can be measured by determining what force will cause a permanent

deformation in the material. Hardness can also be measured using a scale like Mohs hardness

scale. On this scale, diamond is the hardest at 10 and talc is the softest at 1.

Itneterreessttinigng Remembering that the Mohs scale is the hardness scale and that the softest

FFacctt substance is talc will often come in handy for general knowledge quizes.

The toughness of a material is a measure of how it can resist breaking when it is stressed. It is

scientifically defined as the amount of energy that a material can absorb before breaking.

A ductile material is a substance that can undergo large plastic deformation without fracturing.

Many metals are very ductile and they can be drawn into wires, e.g. copper, silver, aluminium

and gold.

A malleable material is a substance that can easily undergo plastic deformation by hammering

or rolling. Again, metals are malleable substances, e.g. copper can be hammered into sheets

and aluminium can be rolled into aluminium foil.

A brittle material fractures with very little or no plastic deformation. Glassware and ceramics

are brittle.

22.4.2 Structure and failure of materials

Many substances fail because they have a weakness in their atomic structure. There are a

number of problems that can cause these weaknesses in structure. These are vacancies,

dislocations, grain boundaries and impurities.

Vacancies occur when there are spaces in the structure of a crystalline solid. These vacancies

cause weakness and the substance often fail at these places. Think about bricks in a wall, if

you started removing bricks the wall would get weaker.

Dislocations occur when there are no strong bonds between two rows in a crystal lattice. The

crystal will fail along this boundary when sufficient force is applied. The two pieces of the

crystal keep their shape and structure but move along the boundary.

Impurities in a crystal structure can cause a weak spot in the crystal lattice around the

impurity. Like vacancies, the substance often fail from these places in the lattice. This you can

think of as bricks in a wall which don't fit properly, they are the wrong kind of bricks (atoms)

to make the structure strong.

A difference in grain size in a crystal lattice will result in rusting or oxidation at the boundary

which again will result in failure when sufficient force is applied.

22.4.3 Controlling the properties of materials

There are a number of processes that can be used to ensure that materials are less likely to fail.

We shall look at a few methods in this section.

509

22.4 CHAPTER 22. MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER - GRADE 12

Cold working

Cold working is a process in which a metal is strengthened by repeatedly being reshaped. This

is carried out at a temperature below the melting point of the metal. The repeated shaping of

the metal result in dislocations which then prevent further dislocations in the metal. Cold

working increases the strength of the metal but in so doing, the metal loses its ductility. We

say the metal is work-hardened.

Annealing

Annealing is a process in which a metal is heated strongly to a temperature that is about half

of its melting point. When the metal cools, it recrystallises which removes vacancies and

dislocations in the metal. Annealing is often used before cold working. In annealing the metal

cools very very slowly.

Alloying

An alloy is a mixture of a metal with other substances. The other substances can be metal or

non-metal. An alloy often has properties that are very different to the properties of the

substances from which it is made. The added substances strengthen the metal by preventing

dislocations from spreading. Ordinary steel is an alloy of iron and carbon. There are many

types of steel that also include other metals with iron and carbon. Brass is an alloy of copper

and Zinc. Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin. Gold and silver that is used in coins or jewellery

are also alloyed.

Tempering

Tempering is a process in which a metal is melted then quickly cooled. The rapid cooling is

called quenching. Usually tempering is done a number of times before a metal has the correct

properties that are needed for a particular application.

Sintering

Sintering is used for making ceramic objects among other things. In this process the substance

is heated so that its particles stick together. It is used with substances that have a very high

melting point. The resulting product is often very pure and it is formed in the process into the

shape that is wanted. Unfortunately, sintered products are brittle.

22.4.4 Steps of Roman Swordsmithing

• Purifying the iron ore.

• Heating the iron blocks in a furnace with charcoal.

• Hammering and getting into the needed shape. The smith used a hammer to pound the

metal into blade shape. He usually used tongs to hold the iron block in place.

• Reheating. When the blade cooled, the smith reheated it to keep it workable. While

reheated and hammered repeatedly.

• Quenching which involved the process of white heating and cooling in water. Quenching

made the blade harder and stronger. At the same time it made the blade quite brittle,

which was a considerable problem for the sword smiths.

• Tempering was then done to avoid brittleness the blade was tempered. In another words

it was reheated a final time to a very specific temperature. How the Romans do balanced

the temperature? The smith was guided only by the blade's color and his own experience.

510
