23.3 Energy

23.3.1 External and Internal Forces

In Grade 10, you saw that mechanical energy was conserved in the absence of external forces.

It is important to know whether a force is an internal force or an external force, because this is

related to whether the force can change an object's total mechanical energy when it does work

upon an object.

Activity :: Investigations : External Forces

(NOTE TO SELF: need an activity that helps the learner investigate how

energy is lost when external forces do work on an object.)

When an external force (for example friction, air resistance, applied force) does work on an

object, the total mechanical energy (KE + PE) of that object changes. If positive work is done,

then the object will gain energy. If negative work is done, then the object will lose energy. The

gain or loss in energy can be in the form of potential energy, kinetic energy, or both. However,

the work which is done is equal to the change in mechanical energy of the object.

Activity :: Investigation : Internal Forces and Energy Conservation

(NOTE TO SELF: need an activity that helps the learner investigate how

energy changes form when an internal force does work on an object.)

519

23.3 CHAPTER 23. WORK, ENERGY AND POWER - GRADE 12

When an internal force does work on an object by an (for example, gravitational and spring

forces), the total mechanical energy (KE + PE) of that object remains constant but the

object's energy can change form. For example, as an object falls in a gravitational field from a

high elevation to a lower elevation, some of the object's potential energy is changed into

kinetic energy. However, the sum of the kinetic and potential energies remain constant. When

the only forces doing work are internal forces, energy changes forms - from kinetic to potential

(or vice versa); yet the total amount of mechanical is conserved.

23.3.2 Capacity to do Work

Energy is the capacity to do work. When positive work is done on an object, the system doing

the work loses energy. In fact, the energy lost by a system is exactly equal to the work

done by the system. An object with larger potential energy has a greater capacity to do work.

Worked Example 152: Work Done on a System

Question: Show that a hammer of mass 2 kg does more work when dropped from

a height of 10 m than when dropped from a height of 5 m. Confirm that the

hammer has a greater potential energy at 10 m than at 5 m.

Answer

Step 5 : Determine what is given and what is required

We are given:

• the mass of the hammer, m =2 kg

• height 1, h1=10 m

• height 2, h2=5 m

We are required to show that the hammer does more work when dropped from h1

than from h2. We are also required to confirm that the hammer has a greater

potential energy at 10 m than at 5 m.

Step 6 : Determine how to approach the problem

1. Calculate the work done by the hammer, W1, when dropped from h1 using:

W1 = Fg · h1.

2. Calculate the work done by the hammer, W2, when dropped from h2 using:

W2 = Fg · h2.

3. Compare W1 and W2

4. Calculate potential energy at h1 and h2 and compare using:

PE = m · g · h. (23.2)

Step 7 : Calculate W1

W1 = Fg · h1

= m · g · h1

= (2 kg)(9.8m · s−2)(10m)

= 196 J

Step 8 : Calculate W2

W2 = Fg · h2

= m · g · h2

= (2 kg)(9.8m · s−2)(5m)

= 98 J

520
