25.3 Addition and Subtraction of Light

25.3.1 Additive Primary Colours

The primary colours of light are red, green and blue. When all the primary colours are

superposed (added together), white light is produced. Red, green and blue are therefore called

the additive primary colours. All the other colours can be produced by different combinations

of red, green and blue.

544

CHAPTER 25. COLOUR - GRADE 12 25.3

25.3.2 Subtractive Primary Colours

The subtractive primary colours are obtained by subtracting one of the three additive primary

colours from white light. The subtractive primary colours are yellow, magenta and cyan.

Magenta appears as a pinkish-purplish colour and cyan looks greenish-blue. You can see how

the primary colours of light add up to the different subtractive colours in the illustration below.

red + green + blue = white

PRIMARY COLOURS SUBTRACTIVE

PRIMARY COLOURS

red + green = yellow

red + blue = magenta

green + blue = cyan

Activity :: Experiment : Colours of light

Aim:

To investigate the additive properties of colours and determine the complementary

colours of light.

Apparatus:

You will need two battery operated torches with flat bulb fronts, a large piece of

white paper, and some pieces of cellophane paper of the following colours: red,

blue, green, yellow, cyan, magenta. (You should easily be able to get these from a

newsagents.)

Make a table in your workbook like the one below:

Colour 1 Colour 2 Final colour prediction Final colour measured

red blue

red green

green blue

magenta green

yellow blue

cyan red

Before you begin your experiment, use what you know about colours of light to

write down in the third column "Final colour prediction", what you think the result

of adding the two colours of light will be. You will then be able to test your

predictions by making the following measurements:

Method:

Proceed according to the table above. Put the correct colour of cellophane paper

over each torch bulb. e.g. the first test will be to put red cellophane on one torch

and blue cellophane on the other. Switch on the torch with the red cellophane over

it and shine it onto the piece of white paper.

What colour is the light?

Turn off that torch and turn on the one with blue cellophane and shine it onto the

white paper.

What colour is the light?

Now shine both torches with their cellophane coverings onto the same spot on the

white paper. What is the colour of the light produced? Write this down in the

fourth column of your table.

Repeat the experiment for the other colours of cellophane so that you can

complete your table.

Questions:

545
