27.3.2 Uses of Electron Microscopes

Electron microscopes can be used to study:

• the topography of an object − how its surface looks.

• the morphology of particles making up an object − its shape and size.

• the composition of an object − the elements and compounds that the object is

composed of and the relative amounts of them.

• the crystallographic information of the object − how the atoms are arranged in the

object.

577

27.4 CHAPTER 27. WAVE NATURE OF MATTER - GRADE 12

CHAPTER 27. WAVE NATURE OF MATTER - GRADE 12 27.3

Generally, the transmission electron microscope's resolution is about an order of

magnitude better than the SEM resolution, however, because the SEM image relies

on surface processes rather than transmission it is able to image bulk samples and

has a much greater depth of view, and so can produce images that are a good

representation of the 3D structure of the sample.

27.3.1 Disadvantages of an Electron Microscope

Electron microscopes are expensive to buy and maintain. they are also very sensitive to

vibration and external magnetic fields. This means that special facilities are required to house

microscopes aimed at achieving high resolutions. Also the targets have to be viewed in

vacuum, as the electrons would scatter with the molecules that make up air.

Extension: Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM)

Scanning electron microscopes usually image conductive or semi-conductive

materials best. A common preparation technique is to coat the target with a

several-nanometer layer of conductive material, such as gold, from a sputtering

machine; however this process has the potential to disturb delicate samples.

The targets have to be prepared in many ways to give proper detail, which may

result in artifacts purely the result of treatment. This gives the problem of

distinguishing artifacts from material, particularly in biological samples. Scientists

maintain that the results from various preparation techniques have been compared,

and as there is no reason that they should all produce similar artifacts, it is

therefore reasonable to believe that electron microscopy features correlate with

living cells.

Itneterreessttinigng The first electron microscope prototype was built in 1931 by the German

FFacctt engineers Ernst Ruska and Maximillion Knoll. It was based on the ideas and

discoveries of Louis de Broglie. Although it was primitive and was not ideal for

practical use, the instrument was still capable of magnifying objects by four

hundred times. The first practical electron microscope was built at the

University of Toronto in 1938, by Eli Franklin Burton and students Cecil Hall,

James Hillier and Albert Prebus.

Although modern electron microscopes can magnify objects up to two million

times, they are still based upon Ruska's prototype and his correlation between

wavelength and resolution. The electron microscope is an integral part of many

laboratories. Researchers use it to examine biological materials (such as

microorganisms and cells), a variety of large molecules, medical biopsy samples,

metals and crystalline structures, and the characteristics of various surfaces.

27.3.2 Uses of Electron Microscopes

Electron microscopes can be used to study:

• the topography of an object − how its surface looks.

• the morphology of particles making up an object − its shape and size.

• the composition of an object − the elements and compounds that the object is

composed of and the relative amounts of them.

• the crystallographic information of the object − how the atoms are arranged in the

object.

577

27.4 CHAPTER 27. WAVE NATURE OF MATTER - GRADE 12

