29.3 Filters and Signal Tuning

29.3.1 Capacitors and Inductors as Filters

We have already seen how capacitors and inductors pass current more easily at certain

frequencies than others. To recap: if we examine the equation for the reactance of a capacitor,

we see that the frequency is in the denominator. Therefore, when the frequency is low, the

capacitive reactance is very high. This is why a capacitor blocks the flow of DC and low

frequency AC because its reactance increases with decreasing frequency.

When the frequency is high, the capacitive reactance is low. This is why a capacitor allows the

flow of high frequency AC because its reactance decreases with increasing frequency.

Therefore putting a capacitor in a circuit blocks the low frequencies and allows the high

frequencies to pass. This is called a high pass filter. A filter like this can be used in the ‘treble'

setting of a sound mixer or music player which controls the amount of high frequency signal

reaching the speaker. The more high frequency signal there is, the ‘tinnier' the sound. A simple

high pass filter circuit is shown in Figure 29.5.

Similarly, if we examine the equation for the reactance of an inductor, we see that inductive

reactance increases with increasing frequency. Therefore, when the frequency is low, the

inductive reactance is very low. This is why an inductor allows the flow of DC and low

frequency AC because its reactance decreases with decreasing frequency.

When the frequency is high, the inductive reactance is high. This is why an inductor blocks the

flow of high frequency AC because its reactance increases with increasing frequency.

Therefore putting an inductor in a circuit blocks the high frequencies and allows the low

frequencies to pass. This is called a low pass filter. A filter like this can be used in the ‘bass'

setting of a sound mixer or music player which controls the amount of low frequency signal

reaching the speaker. The more low frequency signal there is, the more the sound ‘booms'. A

simple low pass filter circuit is shown in Figure 29.6.

C

L

Figure 29.5: A high pass filter. High frequencies easily pass through the capacitor and into the

next part of the circuit, while low frequencies pass through the inductor straight to ground.

29.3.2 LRC Circuits, Resonance and Signal Tuning

A circuit containing a resistor, a capacitor and an inductor all in series is called an LRC circuit.

Because the components are in series, the current through each component at a particular time

will be the same as the current through the others. The voltage across the resistor will be in

phase with the current. The voltage across the inductor will be 90◦ ahead of the current (the

current always follows or lags the voltage in an inductor). The voltage across the capacitor will

be 90◦ behind the current (the current leads the voltage for a capacitor). The phases of the

three voltages are shown in Figure 29.7.

596

CHAPTER 29. ELECTRONICS - GRADE 12 29.3

L

C

Figure 29.6: A low pass filter. Low frequencies pass through the inductor and into the next part

of the circuit, while high frequencies pass through the capacitor straight to ground.

VC

VL

I

Time

Figure 29.7: The voltages across the separate components of an LRC circuit. Looking at the

peaks, you see that the voltage across the inductor VL ‘peaks' first, followed 90

◦ later by the

current I, followed 90◦ later by the voltage across the capacitor VC . The voltage across the

resistor is not shown - it is in phase with the current and peaks at the same time as the current.

597
