30.8 End of chapter exercise

1. What is the energy of a photon of EM radiation with a frequency of 3× 108 Hz?

2. What is the energy of a photon of light with a wavelength of 660 nm?

3. List the main types of electromagnetic radiation in order of increasing wavelength.

4. List the main uses of:

A radio waves

B infrared

C gamma rays

D X-rays

5. Explain why we need to protect ourselves from ultraviolet radiation from the Sun.

6. List some advantages and disadvantages of using X-rays.

7. What precautions should we take when using cell phones?

8. Write a short essay on a type of electromagnetic waves. You should look at uses,

advantages and disadvantages of your chosen radiation.

9. Explain why some types of electromagnetic radiation are more penetrating than others.

633

30.8 CHAPTER 30. EM RADIATION

634
30.8 CHAPTER 30. EM RADIATION
634
30.8 CHAPTER 30. EM RADIATION

634

Chapter 31

Optical Phenomena and

Properties of Matter - Grade 12

31.1 Introduction

For centuries physicists argued about whether light was a particle or a wave. It was assumed

that light could only be one or the other, but not both.

In earlier chapters on waves (Chapters 6, 24, 25, 26) and optics (Chapters 7 and 13), you

studied how light or other electromagnetic radiation propagates like a wave. The wave nature

of light of was demonstrated by the propagation of light in examples such as diffraction,

interference, and polarisation of light.

You also saw in Chapter 30 on electromagnetic radiation how light sometimes behaves as a

particle. This chapter looks at evidence supporting the particle model of light. The idea that

light can have both wave and particle properties was one of the most important discoveries of

the twentieth century.

31.2 The transmission and scattering of light

31.2.1 Energy levels of an electron

We have seen that the electrons in an atom have different energy levels. When the electron

receives enough energy, it can jump up to a higher energy level. This is called 'exciting' the

electron. When the electron in a high energy level sheds some energy, it drops to a lower

energy level.

We have also seen that the energy associated with light at a specific wavelength is given by:

hc

E = .

λ

In the particle model of light, this means that each packet of light (photon) at a wavelength λ

has energy:

hc

E = .

λ

For the electron to receive energy, it absorbs a photon and gets its energy. When an electron

loses energy to drop to a lower level, it emits (gives off) a photon with that energy.

635
