31.2 The transmission and scattering of light

31.2.1 Energy levels of an electron

We have seen that the electrons in an atom have different energy levels. When the electron

receives enough energy, it can jump up to a higher energy level. This is called 'exciting' the

electron. When the electron in a high energy level sheds some energy, it drops to a lower

energy level.

We have also seen that the energy associated with light at a specific wavelength is given by:

hc

E = .

λ

In the particle model of light, this means that each packet of light (photon) at a wavelength λ

has energy:

hc

E = .

λ

For the electron to receive energy, it absorbs a photon and gets its energy. When an electron

loses energy to drop to a lower level, it emits (gives off) a photon with that energy.

635

31.2CHAPTER 31. OPTICAL PHENOMENA AND PROPERTIES OF MATTER - GRADE 12

31.2.2 Interaction of light with metals

When light encounters or passes through a material, the photons of the light interact with the

atoms or molecules of the material. Depending on the strength of the interactions and how

often they happen, the light will pass through the material or be scattered in some other

direction.

Each wavelength of light relates to a particular energy, and the closer that energy is to the

energy difference between two of the levels of the atom, the likelier the photon is to interact

with the atom.

When visible or ultraviolet (UV) radiation shines on a metal, the photons are absorbed by the

electrons in the metal. The electrons are then excited up to a higher energy level. When an

electron returns to a lower energy level, another photon is emitted. This is how light is

reflected off a metal surface.

In previous chapters, you have studied geometrical optics, which tells us what happens to rays

of light when they are reflected off a surface or refracted through a lens. That tells us what

happens to light rays, made up of many photons, on a large scale. If you look at a smaller

level, i.e. on a microscopic scale, then reflection and refraction happen by all the photons

interacting with the atoms of the lens or mirror. The photons get absorbed and re-emitted

many times before emerging as the finals rays of light that we see.

Scattering of light is responsible for many effects in everyday life. We see that certain materials

are red or blue, for example, since they contain materials that have energy level differences that

correspond to the energies of the photons that make up red or blue light. These materials then

reflect the red or blue light and absorb the other wavelengths in the visible spectrum. White

objects reflect photons of all wavelengths in the visual spectrum, while black objects absorb

these photons.

Itneterreessttinigng Because a truly black object absorbs all the visual wavelengths of light, and

FFacctt does not re-emit photons at visual wavelengths, we can say that 'black' is not a

colour itself, but rather a lack of colour! Also, since black objects absorb visual

light, they heat up more than objects of other colours which reflect light at

certain wavelengths.

Activity :: Investigation : Reflection and absorption

Aim:

Investigate the interaction of light with differently coloured metal objects

Apparatus:

Find some differently coloured metal objects (at least 5) which will not be

damaged if left in the sun for 15 minutes. Make sure to include at least one white

item and one black item.

Method:

At the start of your lesson set out your objects in direct sunlight. Leave them there

for around 15 minutes.

Alternatively, if it is a sunny day, you can use your teachers' cars for this

experiment - as long as there are some cars of different colours and they have been

standing in direct sunlight for the same length of time!

After 15 minutes is up, touch each of the items/cars (be careful not to burn

yourself!) and compare their temperatures (rate them from 1 to 5 with 1 being

cold and 5 being very hot) in a table such as the example table below:

636
