4.8 CHAPTER 4. GRAVITY AND MECHANICAL ENERGY - GRADE 10

• The Law of Conservation of Energy states that energy cannot be created or destroyed, but

can only be changed from one form into another.

• The Law of Conservation of Mechanical Energy states that the total mechanical energy of

an isolated system remains constant.

• The table below summarises the most important equations:

Weight Fg = m · g

Equation of motion vf = vi + gt

(v

Equation of motion ∆x = i

+vf )

2 t

Equation of motion ∆x = vit+

1

2gt

2

Equation of motion v2f = v

2

i + 2g∆x

Potential Energy PE = mgh

Kinetic Energy KE = 12mv

2

Mechanical Energy U = KE + PE

4.8 End of Chapter Exercises: Gravity and Mechanical En-

ergy

1. Give one word/term for the following descriptions.

(a) The force with which the Earth attracts a body.

(b) The unit for energy.

(c) The movement of a body in the Earth's gravitational field when no other forces act

on it.

(d) The sum of the potential and kinetic energy of a body.

(e) The amount of matter an object is made up of.

2. Consider the situation where an apple falls from a tree. Indicate whether the following

statements regarding this situation are TRUE or FALSE. Write only 'true' or 'false'. If the

statement is false, write down the correct statement.

(a) The potential energy of the apple is a maximum when the apple lands on the ground.

(b) The kinetic energy remains constant throughout the motion.

(c) To calculate the potential energy of the apple we need the mass of the apple and the

height of the tree.

(d) The mechanical energy is a maximum only at the beginning of the motion.

(e) The apple falls at an acceleration of 9,8 m·s−2.

3. [IEB 2005/11 HG] Consider a ball dropped from a height of 1 m on Earth and an identical

ball dropped from 1 m on the Moon. Assume both balls fall freely. The acceleration due

to gravity on the Moon is one sixth that on Earth. In what way do the following compare

when the ball is dropped on Earth and on the Moon.

Mass Weight Increase in kinetic energy

(a) the same the same the same

(b) the same greater on Earth greater on Earth

(c) the same greater on Earth the same

(d) greater on Earth greater on Earth greater on Earth

4. A man fires a rock out of a slingshot directly upward. The rock has an initial velocity of

15 m·s−1.

(a) How long will it take for the rock to reach its highest point?

(b) What is the maximum height that the rock will reach?

(c) Draw graphs to show how the potential energy, kinetic energy and mechanical energy

of the rock changes as it moves to its highest point.

84

CHAPTER 4. GRAVITY AND MECHANICAL ENERGY - GRADE 10 4.8

5. A metal ball of mass 200 g is tied to a light string to make a pendulum. The ball is pulled

to the side to a height (A), 10 cm above the lowest point of the swing (B). Air friction

and the mass of the string can be ignored. The ball is let go to swing freely.

(a) Calculate the potential energy of the ball at point A.

(b) Calculate the kinetic energy of the ball at point B.

(c) What is the maximum velocity that the ball will reach during its motion?

6. A truck of mass 1,2 tons is parked at the top of a hill, 150 m high. The truck driver lets

the truck run freely down the hill to the bottom.

(a) What is the maximum velocity that the truck can achieve at the bottom of the hill?

(b) Will the truck achieve this velocity? Why/why not?

7. A stone is dropped from a window, 3 metres above the ground. The mass of the stone is

25 grams.

(a) Use the Equations of Motion to calculate the velocity of the stone as it reaches the

ground.

(b) Use the Principle of Conservation of Energy to prove that your answer in (a) is correct.

85
CHAPTER 4. GRAVITY AND MECHANICAL ENERGY - GRADE 10 4.8
5. A metal ball of mass 200 g is tied to a light string to make a pendulum. The ball is pulled
to the side to a height (A), 10 cm above the lowest point of the swing (B). Air friction
and the mass of the string can be ignored. The ball is let go to swing freely.
(a) Calculate the potential energy of the ball at point A.
(b) Calculate the kinetic energy of the ball at point B.
(c) What is the maximum velocity that the ball will reach during its motion?
6. A truck of mass 1,2 tons is parked at the top of a hill, 150 m high. The truck driver lets
the truck run freely down the hill to the bottom.
(a) What is the maximum velocity that the truck can achieve at the bottom of the hill?
(b) Will the truck achieve this velocity? Why/why not?
7. A stone is dropped from a window, 3 metres above the ground. The mass of the stone is
25 grams.
(a) Use the Equations of Motion to calculate the velocity of the stone as it reaches the
ground.
(b) Use the Principle of Conservation of Energy to prove that your answer in (a) is correct.
85
4.8 CHAPTER 4. GRAVITY AND MECHANICAL ENERGY - GRADE 10
86
4.8 CHAPTER 4. GRAVITY AND MECHANICAL ENERGY - GRADE 10

86

Chapter 5

Transverse Pulses - Grade 10

5.1 Introduction

This chapter forms the basis of the discussion into mechanical waves. Waves are all around us,

even though most of us are not aware of it. The most common waves are waves in the sea, but

waves can be created in any container of water, ranging from an ocean to a tea-cup. Simply, a

wave is moving energy.

5.2 What is a medium?

In this chapter, as well as in the following chapters, we will speak about waves moving in a

medium. A medium is just the substance or material through which waves move. In other words

the medium carries the wave from one place to another. The medium does not create the wave

and the medium is not the wave. Air is a medium for sound waves, water is a medium for water

waves and rock is a medium for earthquakes (which are also a type of wave). Air, water and

rock are therefore examples of media (media is the plural of medium).

Definition: Medium

A medium is the substance or material in which a wave will move.

In each medium, the atoms that make up the medium are moved temporarily from their rest

position. In order for a wave to travel, the different parts of the medium must be able to interact

with each other.

5.3 What is a pulse?

Activity :: Investigation : Observation of Pulses

Take a heavy rope. Have two people hold the rope stretched out horizontally.

Flick the rope at one end only once.

flick rope upwards at one end, once only

What happens to the disturbance that you created in the rope? Does it stay at the

place where it was created or does it move down the length of the rope?

87
