5.8 CHAPTER 5. TRANSVERSE PULSES - GRADE 10

5.8 Exercises - Transverse Pulses

1. A heavy rope is flicked upwards, creating a single pulse in the rope. Make a drawing of

the rope and indicate the following in your drawing:

(a) The direction of motion of the pulse

(b) Amplitude

(c) Pulse length

(d) Position of rest

2. A pulse has a speed of 2,5m.s−1. How far will it have travelled in 6s?

3. A pulse covers a distance of 75cm in 2,5s. What is the speed of the pulse?

4. How long does it take a pulse to cover a distance of 200mm if its speed is 4m.s−1?

5. The following position-time graph for a pulse in a slinky spring is given. Draw an accurate

sketch graph of the velocity of the pulse against time.

8

position ∆x

(m)

time (s)

4

6. The following velocity-time graph for a particle in a medium is given. Draw an accurate

sketch graph of the position of the particle vs. time.

4

velocity v

(m.s−1)

2

time (s)

3 5

7. Describe what happens to a pulse in a slinky spring when:

(a) the slinky spring is tied to a wall.

(b) the slinky spring is loose, i.e. not tied to a wall.

(Draw diagrams to explain your answers.)

8. The following diagrams each show two approaching pulses. Redraw the diagrams to show

what type of interference takes place, and label the type of interference.

3

1

(a)

2

3

(b)

102

CHAPTER 5. TRANSVERSE PULSES - GRADE 10 5.8

9. Two pulses, A and B, of identical frequency and amplitude are simultaneously generated

in two identical wires of equal mass and length. Wire A is, however, pulled tighter than

wire. Which pulse will arrive at the other end first, or will they both arrive at the same

time?

103
CHAPTER 5. TRANSVERSE PULSES - GRADE 10 5.8
9. Two pulses, A and B, of identical frequency and amplitude are simultaneously generated
in two identical wires of equal mass and length. Wire A is, however, pulled tighter than
wire. Which pulse will arrive at the other end first, or will they both arrive at the same
time?
103
5.8 CHAPTER 5. TRANSVERSE PULSES - GRADE 10
104
5.8 CHAPTER 5. TRANSVERSE PULSES - GRADE 10

104

Chapter 6

Transverse Waves - Grade 10

6.1 Introduction

Waves occur frequently in nature. The most obvious examples are waves in water, on a dam, in

the ocean, or in a bucket. We are most interested in the properties that waves have. All waves

have the same properties, so if we study waves in water, then we can transfer our knowledge to

predict how other examples of waves will behave.

6.2 What is a transverse wave?

We have studied pulses in Chapter 5, and know that a pulse is a single disturbance that travels

through a medium. A wave is a periodic, continuous disturbance that consists of a train of

pulses.

Definition: Wave

A wave is a periodic, continuous disturbance that consists of a train of pulses.

Definition: Transverse wave

A transverse wave is a wave where the movement of the particles of the medium is perpen-

dicular to the direction of propagation of the wave.

Activity :: Investigation : Transverse Waves

Take a rope or slinky spring. Have two people hold the rope or spring stretched

out horizontally. Flick the one end of the rope up and down continuously to create

a train of pulses.

Flick rope up and down

1. Describe what happens to the rope.

2. Draw a diagram of what the rope looks like while the pulses travel along it.

105
