6.4 Standing Waves and Boundary Conditions

6.4.1 Reflection of a Transverse Wave from a Fixed End

We have seen that when a pulse meets a fixed endpoint, the pulse is reflected, but it is inverted.

Since a transverse wave is a series of pulses, a transverse wave meeting a fixed endpoint is also

reflected and the reflected wave is inverted. That means that the peaks and troughs are swapped

around.

reflected wave

wall wall

Figure 6.3: Reflection of a transverse wave from a fixed end.

6.4.2 Reflection of a Transverse Wave from a Free End

If transverse waves are reflected from an end, which is free to move, the waves sent down the

string are reflected but do not suffer a phase shift as shown in Figure 6.4.

6.4.3 Standing Waves

What happens when a reflected transverse wave meets an incident transverse wave? When two

waves move in opposite directions, through each other, interference takes place. If the two waves

have the same frequency and wavelength then standing waves are generated.

Standing waves are so-called because they appear to be standing still.

118

CHAPTER 6. TRANSVERSE WAVES - GRADE 10 6.4

reflected wave

pole pole

Figure 6.4: Reflection of a transverse wave from a free end.

Activity :: Investigation : Creating Standing Waves

Tie a rope to a fixed object such that the tied end does not move. Continuously

move the free end up and down to generate firstly transverse waves and later standing

waves.

We can now look closely how standing waves are formed. Figure 6.5 shows a reflected wave

meeting an incident wave.

Figure 6.5: A reflected wave (solid line) approaches the incident wave (dashed line).

When they touch, both waves have an amplitude of zero:

Figure 6.6: A reflected wave (solid line) meets the incident wave (dashed line).

If we wait for a short time the ends of the two waves move past each other and the waves

overlap. To find the resultant wave, we add the two together.

Figure 6.7: A reflected wave (solid line) overlaps slightly with the incident wave (dashed line).

In this picture, we show the two waves as dotted lines and the sum of the two in the overlap

region is shown as a solid line:

119
