6.6 Exercises

1. A standing wave is formed when:

(a) a wave refracts due to changes in the properties of the medium

(b) a wave reflects off a canyon wall and is heard shortly after it is formed

(c) a wave refracts and reflects due to changes in the medium

(d) two identical waves moving different directions along the same medium interfere

2. How many nodes and anti-nodes are shown in the diagram?

3. Draw a transverse wave that is reflected from a fixed end.

4. Draw a transverse wave that is reflected from a free end.

5. A wave travels along a string at a speed of 1,5m·s−1. If the frequency of the source of

the wave is 7,5 Hz, calculate:

(a) the wavelength of the wave

(b) the period of the wave

127

6.6 CHAPTER 6. TRANSVERSE WAVES - GRADE 10

128
6.6 CHAPTER 6. TRANSVERSE WAVES - GRADE 10
128
6.6 CHAPTER 6. TRANSVERSE WAVES - GRADE 10

128

Chapter 7

Geometrical Optics - Grade 10

7.1 Introduction

You are indoors on a sunny day. A beam of sunlight through a window lights up a section of

the floor. How would you draw this sunbeam? You might draw a series of parallel lines showing

the path of the sunlight from the window to the floor. This is not exactly accurate - no matter

how hard you look, you will not find unique lines of light in the sunbeam! However, this is a

good way to draw light. It is also a good way to model light geometrically, as we will see in this

chapter.

We will call these narrow, imaginary lines of light light rays. Since light is an electromagnetic

wave, you could think of a light ray as the path of a point on the crest of a wave. Or, you could

think of a light ray as the path taken by a miniscule particle that carries light. We will always

draw them the same way: as straight lines between objects, images, and optical devices.

We can use light rays to model mirrors, lenses, telescopes, microscopes, and prisms. The study

of how light interacts with materials is optics. When dealing with light rays, we are usually

interested in the shape of a material and the angles at which light rays hit it. From these angles,

we can work out, for example, the distance between an object and its reflection. We therefore

refer to this kind of optics as geometrical optics.

7.2 Light Rays

In physics we use the idea of a light ray to indicate the direction that light travels. Light rays

are lines with arrows and are used to show the path that light travels. In Figure 7.1, the light

rays from the object enters the eye and the eye sees the object.

The most important thing to remember is that we can only see an object when light from the

object enters our eyes. The object must be a source of light (for example a light bulb) or else it

must reflect light from a source (for example the moon), and the reflected light enters our eyes.

Important: We cannot see an object unless light from that object enters our eyes.

Definition: Light ray

Light rays are straight lines with arrows to show the path of light.

Important: Light rays are not real. They are merely used to show the path that light

travels.

129
