8.4.1 The earth's magnetic field

In the picture below, you can see a representation of the earth's magnetic field which is very

similar to the magnetic field of a giant bar magnet like the one on the right of the picture. So

the earth has two sets of north poles and south poles: geographic poles and magnetic poles.

11.5o

Magnetic 'North' pole

Geographic North pole

S

N

The earth's magnetic field is thought to be caused by churning liquid metals in the core which

causes electric currents and a magnetic field. From the picture you can see that the direction

of magnetic north and true north are not identical. The geographic north pole, which is the

point through which the earth's rotation axis goes, is about 11,5o away from the direction of

the magnetic north pole (which is where a compass will point). However, the magnetic poles

shift slightly all the time.

Another interesting thing to note is that if we think of the earth as a big bar magnet, and we

know that magnetic field lines always point from north to south, then the compass tells us that

what we call the magnetic north pole is actually the south pole of the bar magnet!

Itneterreessttinigng The direction of the earth's magnetic field flips direction about once every

FFacctt 200 000 years! You can picture this as a bar magnet whose north and south pole

periodically switch sides. The reason for this is still not fully understood.

The earth's magnetic field is very important for humans and other animals on earth because it

stops charged particles emitted by the sun from hitting the earth and us. Charged particles can

also damage and cause interference with telecommunications (such as cell phones). Charged

particles (mainly protons and electrons) are emitted by the sun in what is called the solar wind,

and travel towards the earth. These particles spiral in the earth's magnetic field towards the

poles. If they collide with other particles in the earth's atmosphere they sometimes cause red or

green lights or a glow in the sky which is called the aurora. This happens close to the north and

south pole and so we cannot see the aurora from South Africa.

