10.3 Current

10.3.1 Flow of Charge

We have been talking about moving charge. We need to be able to deal with numbers, how

much charge is moving, how fast is it moving? The concept that gives us this information is

called current. Current allows us to quantify the movement of charge.

When we talk about current we talk about how much charge moves past a fixed point in circuit

in one second. Think of charges being pushed around the circuit by the battery, there are charges

in the wires but unless there is a battery they won't move. When one charge moves the charges

next to it also move. They keep their spacing. If you had a tube of marbles like in this picture.

marble marble

If you push one marble into the tube one must come out the other side. If you look at any point

in the tube and push one marble into the tube, one marble will move past the point you are

looking at. This is similar to charges in the wires of a circuit.

If a charge moves they all move and the same number move at every point in the circuit.

10.3.2 Current

Now that we've thought about the moving charges and visualised what is happening we need

to get back to quantifying moving charge. I've already told you that we use current but we still

need to define it.

Definition: Current

Current is the rate at which charges moves past a fixed point in a circuit. We use the

symbol I to show current and it is measured in amperes (A). One ampere is one coulomb

of charge moving in one second.

Q

I =

∆t

When current flows in a circuit we show this on a diagram by adding arrows. The arrows show

the direction of flow in a circuit. By convention we say that charge flows from the positive

terminal on a battery to the negative terminal.

198

CHAPTER 10. ELECTRIC CIRCUITS - GRADE 10 10.3

10.3.3 Series Circuits

In a series circuit, the charge has a single path from the battery, returning to the battery.

R

E R

R

The arrows in this picture show you the direction that charge will flow in the circuit. They don't

show you much charge will flow, only the direction.

Itneterreessttinigng Benjamin Franklin made a guess about the direction of charge flow when rubbing

FFacctt smooth wax with rough wool. He thought that the charges flowed from the wax to

the wool (i.e. from positive to negative) which was opposite to the real direction.

Due to this, electrons are said to have a negative charge and so objects which Ben

Franklin called "negative" (meaning a shortage of charge) really have an excess

of electrons. By the time the true direction of electron flow was discovered, the

convention of "positive" and "negative" had already been so well accepted in the

scientific world that no effort was made to change it.

Important: A cell does not produce the same amount of current no matter what is

connected to it. While the voltage produced by a cell is constant, the amount of current

supplied depends on what is in the circuit.

How does the current through the battery in a circuit with several resistors in series compare to

the current in a circuit with a single resistor?

Activity :: Experiment : Current in Series Circuits

Aim:

To determine the effect of multiple resistors on current in a circuit

Apparatus:

• Battery

• Resistors

• Light bulb

• Wires

199
