22.3 Elasticity, plasticity, fracture, creep

22.3.1 Elasticity and plasticity

Materials are classified as plastic or elastic depending on how they respond to an applied force.

It is important to note that plastic substances are not necessarily a type of plastic (polymer)

they only behave like plastic. Think of them as being like plastic which you will be familiar with.

A rubber band is a material that has elasticity. It returns to its original shape after an applied

force is removed, providing that the material is not stretched beyond its elastic limit.

Plasticine is an example of a material that is plastic. If you flatten a ball of plasticine, it will

stay flat. A plastic material does not return to its original shape after an applied force is

removed.

• Elastic materials return to their original shape.

• Plastic materials deform easily and do not return to their original shape.

22.3.2 Fracture, creep and fatigue

Some materials are neither plastic nor elastic. These substances will break or fracture when a

large enough force is applied to them. The brittle glass we mentioned earlier is an example.

Creep occurs when a material deforms over a long period of time because of an applied force.

An example of creep is the bending of a shelf over time when a heavy object is put on it. Creep

may eventually lead to the material fracturing. The application of heat may lead to an increase

in creep in a material.

Fatigue is similar to creep. The difference between the two is that fatigue results from the force

being applied and then removed repeatedly over a period of time. With metals this results in

failure because of metal fatigue.

• Fracture is an abrupt breaking of the material.

• Creep is a slow deformation process due to a continuous force over a long time.

• Fatigue is weakening of the material due to short forces acting many many times.

Exercise: Elasticity, plasticity, fracture and creep

1. List the similarities and differences between elastic and plastic deformation.

2. List the similarities and differences between creep and fracture as modes of

failure in material.

508

CHAPTER 22. MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER - GRADE 12 22.4

22.4 Failure and strength of materials

22.4.1 The properties of matter

The strength of a material is defined as the stress (the force per unit cross-sectional area) that

it can withstand. Strength is measured in newtons per square metre (N ·m−2).

Stiffness is a measure of how flexible a material is. In Science we measure the stiffness of a

material by calculating its Young's Modulus. The Young's modulus is a ratio of how much it

bends to the load applied to it. Stiffness is measure in newtons per metre (N ·m−1).

Hardness of a material can be measured by determining what force will cause a permanent

deformation in the material. Hardness can also be measured using a scale like Mohs hardness

scale. On this scale, diamond is the hardest at 10 and talc is the softest at 1.

Itneterreessttinigng Remembering that the Mohs scale is the hardness scale and that the softest

FFacctt substance is talc will often come in handy for general knowledge quizes.

The toughness of a material is a measure of how it can resist breaking when it is stressed. It is

scientifically defined as the amount of energy that a material can absorb before breaking.

A ductile material is a substance that can undergo large plastic deformation without fracturing.

Many metals are very ductile and they can be drawn into wires, e.g. copper, silver, aluminium

and gold.

A malleable material is a substance that can easily undergo plastic deformation by hammering

or rolling. Again, metals are malleable substances, e.g. copper can be hammered into sheets

and aluminium can be rolled into aluminium foil.

A brittle material fractures with very little or no plastic deformation. Glassware and ceramics

are brittle.

22.4.2 Structure and failure of materials

Many substances fail because they have a weakness in their atomic structure. There are a

number of problems that can cause these weaknesses in structure. These are vacancies,

dislocations, grain boundaries and impurities.

Vacancies occur when there are spaces in the structure of a crystalline solid. These vacancies

cause weakness and the substance often fail at these places. Think about bricks in a wall, if

you started removing bricks the wall would get weaker.

Dislocations occur when there are no strong bonds between two rows in a crystal lattice. The

crystal will fail along this boundary when sufficient force is applied. The two pieces of the

crystal keep their shape and structure but move along the boundary.

Impurities in a crystal structure can cause a weak spot in the crystal lattice around the

impurity. Like vacancies, the substance often fail from these places in the lattice. This you can

think of as bricks in a wall which don't fit properly, they are the wrong kind of bricks (atoms)

to make the structure strong.

A difference in grain size in a crystal lattice will result in rusting or oxidation at the boundary

which again will result in failure when sufficient force is applied.

22.4.3 Controlling the properties of materials

There are a number of processes that can be used to ensure that materials are less likely to fail.

We shall look at a few methods in this section.

509
