24.2.1 Ultrasound and the Doppler Effect

Ultrasonic waves (ultrasound) are sound waves with a frequency greater than 20 000 Hz (the

upper limit of hearing). These waves can be used in medicine to determine the direction of

blood flow. The device, called a Doppler flow meter, sends out sound waves. The sound waves

can travle through skin and tissue and will be reflected by moving objects in the body (like

blood). The reflected waves return to the flow meter where its frequency (received frequency)

is compared to the transmitted frequency. Because of the Doppler effect, blood that is moving

towards the flow meter will change the sound to a higher frequency (blue shift) and blood that

is moving away from the flow meter will cause a lower frequency (red shift).

transmitter receiver

Skin

Blood direction of flow

red blood cells

Tissue

Ultrasound can be used to determine whether blood is flowing in the right direction in the

circulation system of unborn babies, or identify areas in the body where blood flow is restricted

due to narrow veins. The use of ultrasound equipment in medicine is called sonography or

ultrasonography.

Exercise: The Doppler Effect with Sound

1. Suppose a train is approaching you as you stand on the platform at the

station. As the train approaches the station, it slows down. All the while, the

engineer is sounding the hooter at a constant frequency of 400 Hz. Describe

the pitch and the changes in pitch that you hear.

2. Passengers on a train hear its whistle at a frequency of 740 Hz. Anja is

standing next to the train tracks. What frequency does Anja hear as the train

moves directly toward her at a speed of 25 m·s−1?

3. A small plane is taxiing directly away from you down a runway. The noise of

the engine, as the pilot hears it, has a frequency 1,15 times the frequency that

you hear. What is the speed of the plane?

4. A Doppler flow meter detected a blue shift in frequency while determining the

direction of blood flow. What does a "blue shift" mean and how does it take

place?

