25.3.1 Additive Primary Colours

The primary colours of light are red, green and blue. When all the primary colours are

superposed (added together), white light is produced. Red, green and blue are therefore called

the additive primary colours. All the other colours can be produced by different combinations

of red, green and blue.

544

CHAPTER 25. COLOUR - GRADE 12 25.3

25.3 CHAPTER 25. COLOUR - GRADE 12

2. Calculate the wavelength of light which has a frequency of 550× 1012 Hz.

3. What colour is light which has a wavelength of 470× 109 m and what is its

frequency?

4. What is the wavelength of light with a frequency of 510× 1012 Hz and what

is its color?

25.2.1 Dispersion of white light

White light, like the light which comes from the sun, is made up of all the visible wavelengths

of light. In other words, white light is a combination of all the colours of visible light.

In Chapter 7, you learnt that the speed of light is different in different substances. The speed

of light in different substances depends on the frequency of the light. For example, when white

light travels through glass, light of the different frequencies is slowed down by different

amounts. The lower the frequency, the less the speed is reduced which means that red light

(lowest frequency) is slowed down less than violet light (highest frequency). We can see this

when white light is incident on a glass prism.

Have a look at the picture below. When the white light hits the edge of the prism, the light

which travels through the glass is refracted as it moves from the less dense medium (air) to the

more dense medium (glass).

white light

red

orange

yellow

green

blue

indigo

violet

• The red light which is slowed down the least, is refracted the least.

• The violet light which is slowed down the most, is refracted the most.

When the light hits the other side of the prism it is again refracted but the angle of the prism

edge allows the light to remain separated into its different colours. White light is therefore

separated into its different colours by the prism and we say that the white light has been

dispersed by the prism.

The dispersion effect is also responsible for why we see rainbows. When sunlight hits drops of

water in the atmosphere, the white light is dispersed into its different colours by the water.

25.3 Addition and Subtraction of Light

25.3.1 Additive Primary Colours

The primary colours of light are red, green and blue. When all the primary colours are

superposed (added together), white light is produced. Red, green and blue are therefore called

the additive primary colours. All the other colours can be produced by different combinations

of red, green and blue.

544

CHAPTER 25. COLOUR - GRADE 12 25.3

