28.6 End of chapter exercise

1. [SC 2003/11] Explain the difference between alternating current (AC) and direct current

(DC).

2. Explain how an AC generator works. You may use sketches to support your answer.

3. What are the advantages of using an AC motor rather than a DC motor.

4. Explain how a DC motor works.

5. At what frequency is AC generated by Eskom in South Africa?

IEB 2001/11 HG1 - Work, Energy and Power in Electric Circuits

Mr. Smith read through the agreement with Eskom (the electricity provider). He found

out that alternating current is supplied to his house at a frequency of 50 Hz. He then

consulted a book on electric current, and discovered that alternating current moves to

and fro in the conductor. So he refused to pay his Eskom bill on the grounds that every

electron that entered his house would leave his house again, so therefore Eskom had

supplied him with nothing!

Was Mr. smith correct? Or has he misunderstood something about what he is paying

for? Explain your answer briefly.

6. What do we mean by the following terms in electrodynamics?

A inductance

B reactance

C solenoid

D permeability

589

28.6 CHAPTER 28. ELECTRODYNAMICS - GRADE 12

590
28.6 CHAPTER 28. ELECTRODYNAMICS - GRADE 12
590
28.6 CHAPTER 28. ELECTRODYNAMICS - GRADE 12

590

Chapter 29

Electronics - Grade 12

29.1 Introduction

Electronics and electrical devices surround us in daily life. From the street lights and water

pumps to computers and digital phones, electronics have enabled the digital revolution to

occur. All electronics are built on a backbone of simple circuits, and so an understanding of

circuits is vital in understanding more complex devices.

This chapter will explain the basic physics principles of many of the components of electronic

devices. We will begin with an explanation of capacitors and inductors. We see how these are

used in tuning a radio. Next, we look at active components such as transistors and operational

amplifiers. Lastly, the chapter will finish with an explanation of digital electronics, including

logic gates and counting circuits.

Before studying this chapter, you will want to remind yourself of:

• The meaning of voltage (V ), current (I) and resistance (R), as covered in Grade 10 (see

chapter 10), and Grade 11 (see chapter 19).

• Capacitors in electric circuits, as covered in Grade 11 (see section 17.6).

• Semiconductors, as covered in Grade 11 (see chapter 20).

• The meaning of an alternating current (see section 28.3).

• Capacitance (C) and Inductance (L) (see section 28.4).

29.2 Capacitive and Inductive Circuits

Earlier in Grade 12, you were shown alternating currents (a.c.) and you saw that the voltage

and the current varied with time. If the a.c. supply is connected to a resistor, then the current

and voltage will be proportional to each other. This means that the current and voltage will

‘peak' at the same time. We say that the current and voltage are in phase. This is shown in

Figure 29.1.

When a capacitor is connected to an alternating voltage, the maximum voltage is proportional

to the maximum current, but the maximum voltage does not occur at the same time as the

maximum current. The current has its maximum (it peaks) one quarter of a cycle before the

voltage peaks. Engineers say that the ‘current leads the voltage by 90◦'. This is shown in

Figure 29.2.

For a circuit with a capacitor, the instantaneous value of V is not constant. However the value

I

of VmaxI is useful, and is called the capacitive reactance (XC) of the component. Because itmax

is still a voltage divided by a current (like resistance), its unit is the ohm. The value of XC (C

591
