29.3.1 Capacitors and Inductors as Filters

We have already seen how capacitors and inductors pass current more easily at certain

frequencies than others. To recap: if we examine the equation for the reactance of a capacitor,

we see that the frequency is in the denominator. Therefore, when the frequency is low, the

capacitive reactance is very high. This is why a capacitor blocks the flow of DC and low

frequency AC because its reactance increases with decreasing frequency.

When the frequency is high, the capacitive reactance is low. This is why a capacitor allows the

flow of high frequency AC because its reactance decreases with increasing frequency.

Therefore putting a capacitor in a circuit blocks the low frequencies and allows the high

frequencies to pass. This is called a high pass filter. A filter like this can be used in the ‘treble'

setting of a sound mixer or music player which controls the amount of high frequency signal

reaching the speaker. The more high frequency signal there is, the ‘tinnier' the sound. A simple

high pass filter circuit is shown in Figure 29.5.

Similarly, if we examine the equation for the reactance of an inductor, we see that inductive

reactance increases with increasing frequency. Therefore, when the frequency is low, the

inductive reactance is very low. This is why an inductor allows the flow of DC and low

frequency AC because its reactance decreases with decreasing frequency.

When the frequency is high, the inductive reactance is high. This is why an inductor blocks the

flow of high frequency AC because its reactance increases with increasing frequency.

Therefore putting an inductor in a circuit blocks the high frequencies and allows the low

frequencies to pass. This is called a low pass filter. A filter like this can be used in the ‘bass'

setting of a sound mixer or music player which controls the amount of low frequency signal

reaching the speaker. The more low frequency signal there is, the more the sound ‘booms'. A

simple low pass filter circuit is shown in Figure 29.6.

C

L

Figure 29.5: A high pass filter. High frequencies easily pass through the capacitor and into the

next part of the circuit, while low frequencies pass through the inductor straight to ground.

