6TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS: RIGHT TRIANGLE APPROACH
6.1 Angle Measure Suppose we want to find the distance from the earth to the sun. Using a tape
measure is obviously impractical, so we need something other than simple
6.2 Trigonometry of Right Triangles
measurements to tackle this problem. Angles are easier to measure than dis-
6.3 Trigonometric Functions tances. For example, we can find the angle formed by the sun, earth, and moon
of Angles by simply pointing to the sun with one arm and to the moon with the other and
estimating the angle between them. The key idea is to find relationships be-
6.4 Inverse Trigonometric Functions tween angles and distances. So if we had a way of determining distances from
and Triangles
angles, we would be able to find the distance to the sun without having to go
6.5 The Law of Sines there. The trigonometric functions provide us with just the tools we need. 
6.6 The Law of Cosines
FOCUS ON MODELING
Surveying ¨
If u is an angle in a right triangle, then the trigonometric ratio sin u is de-
fined as the length of the side opposite u divided by the length of the hypo-
tenuse. This ratio is the same in any similar right triangle, including the huge
triangle formed by the sun, earth, and moon! (See Section 6.2, Exercise 61.)
The trigonometric functions can be defined in two different but equivalent
ways: as functions of real numbers (Chapter 5) or as functions of angles
(Chapter 6). The two approaches are independent of each other, so either
Chapter 5 or Chapter 6 may be studied first. We study both approaches be-
cause the different approaches are required for different applications.
433
      Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
© age fotostock /SuperStock
C H A P T E R
434 C H A P T E R  6 | Trigonometric Functions: Right Triangle Approach
6TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCTIONS: RIGHT TRIANGLE APPROACH
